In one of Aesop’s 2,500-year-old fables,
a crow is searching for water.
It spies a pitcher
and discovers liquid inside—
but it's beyond reach.
Soon, the crow begins dropping
pebbles into the pitcher.
One by one, they displace the water,
and the crow quenches its thirst.
Interestingly, this fable turns out
to be pretty accurate.
In a 2014 experiment,
scientists placed a food reward
in a tube partially filled with water
and watched as crow after crow
dropped stone after stone in
until the food was
in beak-snatching distance.
This is just one of many fascinating
displays of intelligence from corvids—
the bold, brainy family of songbirds
that includes crows, ravens,
jays, and magpies.
To start, corvids are strategic
when it comes to their food.
They ransack trash bins and snatch
bites from under other birds’ beaks.
They also hoard and cache their food.
A single Clark's nutcracker, for instance,
is thought to scatter some 30,000 pine
nuts across more than 2,000 cache sites,
which it can recover more
than nine months later.
And in one experiment, scrub jays
given waxworms and peanuts
cached and retrieved the perishable worms
first and left the peanuts for later.
It seemed the jays not only
recalled where they buried things,
but also what they buried and when.
What's more, experiments show
that scrub jays will bury food
when they know it won’t be available
the next day,
suggesting they can plan
for future events too.
And corvid abilities extend
beyond meal prepping.
In one experiment, a masked person
trapped and released a wild crow.
When the masked person returned,
crows dive-bombed them.
If they wore a different mask,
however, they were ignored,
suggesting that corvids can
distinguish between— and remember—
different human facial characteristics.
Crows also tend to gather around the
bodies of their dead companions and caw—
a behavior sometimes likened to a funeral.
And one study showed that crows
were slower to return to an area
where they’d seen a dead companion,
suggesting they associated it with risk.
Corvids like New Caledonian crows
also demonstrate an impressive proclivity
for reasoning and tool use.
Even in the wild, they fashion sticks
into hook-shaped probes for food.
Some Japanese crows have been observed
placing nuts on the road, waiting nearby,
then retrieving the rewards once
passing cars have cracked them open.
But corvids also do things
that are harder to explain.
They sometimes tote trinkets around,
which might help them practice caching
or serve as gifts to their partners.
And they've been spotted repeatedly
sledding down roofs on plastic lids.
Play activities like this
are relatively common in corvids,
especially juveniles.
Corvids have a longer developmental
period than other songbirds.
And it’s thought that play
encourages learning
and lays a strong foundation
for their intelligent behavior.
Some researchers think cleverness
is crucial
to the highly social lives of corvids.
They breed cooperatively;
live and communicate
in large dynamic groups;
share food;
and mob predators together.
Some have lifelong partnerships
where they recognize their companions,
and track, respond to, and even predict
each other's behaviors and desires.
Scientists today consider corvids
among the smartest animals—
a big step from where
consensus used to be.
In the late 1800s, German scientist
Ludwig Edinger
compared primate and crow brains
and interpreted the crow’s brain structure
as primitive,
dismissing their cognitive abilities.
This was a misinterpretation.
A raven, for example,
has a brain that looks quite different
than a Capuchin monkeys—
and is about a third of the size.
But both animals have a similar number
of neurons in their pallium,
a brain region that’s associated
with cognition.
So while corvid brains travelled
a very different evolutionary
path than primate brains,
it was still one that brought
them sophisticated cognition.
The next time you spot a crow,
you can be assured of its smarts.
Just maybe don’t give it
a bad reason to remember you.